# The Seven Tools of Causal Inference

           

Many people claim that machine learning uses causal inference, as we know, machine learning uses lots of tools and one of them is causal inference but what is causal inference? Does it work fine with it? The kind of causal inference seen in natural human thought can be "algorithmitized" to help produce human-level machine intelligence. There are three obstacles to meeting the increasing expectations for artificial intelligence (AI), according to this article[^1]: the lack of adaptability or robustness; the lack of explainability; and "the lack of understanding of cause-effect connections.". It goes without saying that machine learning is not perfect and sometimes it has more understandable resources are the most important issues facing us today.

First of all, it is worth considering the causal inference’s definition which is an intellectual discipline that considers the assumptions, study designs, and estimation strategies that allow researchers to draw causal conclusions based on data. As detailed below, the term ‘causal conclusion’ used here refers to a conclusion regarding the effect of a causal variable (often referred to as the ‘treatment’ under a broad conception of the word) on some outcome(s) of interest.

Secondly, unlike human beings, machine learning algorithms are bad at determining what’s known as ‘causal inference,’ the process of understanding the independent, actual effect of a certain phenomenon that is happening within a larger system. For example, a human watching a golfer swing a golf club intuitively understands that the golfer’s arms are causing the club to swing, rather than the other way around. However, machine learning algorithms are much better than humans at parsing out small patterns in massive data sets, they struggle to comprehend these minor causal relationships. However, a recent paper from researchers at the Montreal Institute for Learning Algorithms (Mila), Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, and Google Research, poses some potential solutions.

Another point worth nothing is the researchers pose several ways to develop causal machine learning models, two of which include “structural causal models” and “independent causal mechanisms.” Rather than relying on fixed correlations between data sets, these models allow the AI system to understand both the causal variables and their effects on the environment.

Another factor to consider is most machine learning-based methods predict outcomes rather than understanding causality. Machine learning methods have been proved to be efficient in finding correlations in data, but unskilful to determine causation. This issue severely limits the applicability of machine learning methods to infer the causal relationships between the entities of a biological network, and more in general of any dynamical system, such as medical intervention strategies and clinical outcomes system, that is representable as a network.

Taking everything into consideration, we can see that machine learning and causal inference have a really close interaction, causal inference and machine learning can address one of the biggest problems facing machine learning today — that a lot of real-world data is not generated in the same way as the data that we use to train AI models. This means that machine learning models often aren’t robust enough to handle changes in the input data type and can’t always generalize well. By contrast, causal inference explicitly overcomes this problem by considering what might have happened when faced with a lack of information. Ultimately, this means we can utilize causal inference to make our ML models more robust and generalizable.

Bibliography

[^1]: Pearl, Judea. “The Seven Tools of Causal Inference, with Reflections on Machine Learning.” _Communications of the ACM_ 62, no. 3 (February 21, 2019): 54–60. [https://doi.org/10.1145/3241036]([https://doi.org/10.1145/3241036](https://doi.org/10.1145/3241036)).